---
title: Overview
parent: DevOps
has_children: true
has_toc: false
nav_order: 1
mermaid: true
---

# Overview of DevOps

DevOps is a collaborative approach to software development and IT operations that aims to streamline the 
process of delivering high-quality software quickly and reliably. Traditionally, development (Dev) and 
operations (Ops) teams worked in silos, which often led to bottlenecks and miscommunication during the 
transition from coding to deployment. DevOps addresses this by promoting a culture of shared 
responsibility, continuous collaboration, and automation, breaking down the barriers between these 
teams and enabling them to work as a unified unit. Fig. 1 illustrates this combination of development 
activities such as the creation and verification of software with the operational concerns of configuration
release and monitoring.

![Fig. 1. DevOps (<a href="https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0">Kharnagy</a>)](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/0/05/Devops-toolchain.svg){: standalone #fig1 data-title="DevOps" }

{: .attribution}


At its core, DevOps focuses on practices and tools that facilitate a seamless workflow from development 
to production. Key DevOps practices include Continuous Integration (CI) and Continuous Delivery (CD), 
which automate the testing and deployment of code, allowing teams to catch errors early and release 
updates frequently. Infrastructure as Code (IaC) is another central DevOps practice, enabling teams to 
manage and provision infrastructure through code, making it easier to replicate environments, scale 
applications, and recover from issues. Continuous Monitoring is also essential, providing real-time 
insights into the performance, stability, and security of applications in production, helping teams 
detect and resolve issues proactively.

The primary goals of DevOps are to enhance collaboration, improve efficiency, and create a fast, iterative 
feedback loop, allowing teams to respond quickly to user needs and business changes. DevOps ultimately 
fosters a culture of continuous improvement, where quality, speed, and reliability are emphasised 
throughout the software development lifecycle. By uniting development and operations practices, DevOps 
enables organisations to deliver more robust software faster, supporting a dynamic, adaptable approach 
to software delivery.

## History: 2000 - 2020

The origins of DevOps lie in the traditional separation of development and operations teams, a model 
that dominated software engineering for many years. In this approach, development teams focused on writing 
code and delivering new features, while operations teams managed deployment, infrastructure, and system 
maintenance. While this separation allowed for specialisation, it created significant bottlenecks: 
developers often wrote code without considering operational requirements, leading to frequent conflicts 
at deployment. Operations teams, meanwhile, struggled to keep pace with the demands of rapid feature 
releases, and this disconnection slowed down the software delivery process, making it challenging to 
respond quickly to user needs and market changes.

The early 2000s saw the emergence of Agile methodologies, which aimed to speed up development through 
iterative, collaborative processes. However, Agile focused primarily on development and did not address 
deployment or operational efficiency. As Agile practices highlighted the inefficiencies of separate 
development and operations, the need for closer collaboration became evident. In 2008, the term “DevOps” 
was popularised by [Patrick Debois](https://thenewstack.io/qa-patrick-debois-on-the-past-present-and-future-of-devops/), 
who co-organised the first DevOpsDays event in Belgium. This event brought together developers, operations 
staff, and system administrators to discuss the importance of breaking down silos and enhancing cross-team 
collaboration.

Key innovations in the evolution of DevOps included the development of automation tools and the creation 
of CI/CD pipelines, which allowed teams to automate repetitive tasks like code testing, integration, and 
deployment. Automation became a cornerstone of DevOps, enabling teams to deploy code more frequently, 
consistently, and reliably. Containerisation, popularised by Docker in 2013, marked another major milestone, 
allowing applications and their dependencies to be packaged together in a standardised format that could 
run reliably across environments. Containerisation, along with orchestration tools like Kubernetes, 
simplified deployment and scaled infrastructure management, further aligning development and operations 
goals.

Today, DevOps is a widely adopted practice that combines these innovations into a cohesive framework, 
streamlining software delivery from development to deployment. With the addition of continuous monitoring 
and observability, DevOps has become a cycle of continuous improvement, where real-time insights allow 
teams to respond proactively to issues and refine their processes continuously. DevOps has transformed 
software development from a series of isolated stages into an integrated, collaborative process, enabling 
faster, higher-quality releases and fostering a culture of accountability and adaptability.

## Hostory: 2020 - now

Since 2020, DevOps has evolved significantly to meet the demands of increasingly complex software systems, 
distributed teams, and a growing emphasis on security, scalability, and automation. The rapid expansion of 
[cloud-native technologies](https://aws.amazon.com/what-is/cloud-native/), such as containers and 
[Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/), has led to DevOps practices becoming more advanced and closely tied 
to cloud infrastructure management. DevOps now integrates heavily with containerisation and orchestration, 
which allow for scalable, microservices-based architectures that are easier to deploy, manage, and scale. 
This shift has enabled teams to better handle complex applications and respond quickly to changes, as 
infrastructure and services can be managed dynamically.

Another major evolution in DevOps has been the emphasis on _DevSecOps_, where security is embedded 
throughout the development pipeline, rather than addressed only at the end. The rising number of 
cybersecurity threats has driven organisations to adopt security as a core part of their DevOps practices, 
incorporating tools for automated security testing, vulnerability scanning, and policy compliance into 
CI/CD pipelines. This approach allows developers to catch security issues early, ensuring that the 
software is not only reliable and performant but also secure before deployment.

Automation has also become more advanced, with Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) 
increasingly incorporated into DevOps practices. AI-driven DevOps tools can now assist in areas such as 
predictive analytics, anomaly detection, and even automated remediation, enabling teams to identify and 
resolve issues before they affect end-users. This shift has enabled a more proactive, data-driven approach 
to DevOps, where teams can anticipate and mitigate potential issues based on patterns and historical data.

Additionally, the rise of remote and hybrid work environments since 2020 has accelerated the adoption of 
collaborative DevOps tools and practices. Platforms like GitHub, GitLab, and others now offer robust 
features for version control, CI/CD, code review, and team collaboration, allowing distributed teams to 
maintain a high level of productivity and coordination. Tools that facilitate remote collaboration, such 
as Slack integrations, shared dashboards, and real-time monitoring, have become essential to DevOps, 
making it easier for globally distributed teams to work seamlessly together.

Finally, observability has become a central pillar of modern DevOps. With applications now spanning 
microservices and multiple environments, teams need comprehensive insight into system health, performance, 
and dependencies. Observability tools provide real-time data and insights, not only for detecting issues 
but also for understanding system behaviour and user impact, enabling teams to continuously improve their 
applications. Some examples are

* **[Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/)**: An open-source monitoring tool, Prometheus is widely used for 
  collecting and querying metrics from applications and infrastructure. It integrates well with Kubernetes 
  and other cloud-native environments, providing time-series data and alerting capabilities for fast issue 
  detection.

* **[Grafana](https://grafana.com/)**: Often used with Prometheus, Grafana is an open-source data 
  visualisation platform that allows teams to create dashboards for monitoring metrics. It supports 
  various data sources, including Prometheus, Elasticsearch, and InfluxDB, giving teams a flexible way 
  to visualise and analyse system performance.

* **[DataDog](https://www.datadoghq.com/)**: DataDog is a comprehensive observability platform that 
  includes monitoring, logging, and APM (Application Performance Monitoring). It supports cloud and 
  on-premises environments, allowing teams to monitor the health of applications, infrastructure, and 
  user experience from a single platform.

* **[New Relic](https://newrelic.com/)**: New Relic provides end-to-end observability across applications 
  and infrastructure. It includes APM, infrastructure monitoring, and real user monitoring (RUM), helping 
  DevOps teams identify performance bottlenecks, optimise resource usage, and enhance user experience.

* **[Elastic Stack (ELK)](https://www.elastic.co/elastic-stack)**: The Elastic Stack, which includes 
  Elasticsearch, Logstash, and Kibana (often abbreviated as ELK), is a popular solution for centralised 
  logging and visualisation. ELK allows teams to aggregate logs, search and analyse data, and visualise 
  metrics, making it easier to identify issues and track system behaviour.

* **[Splunk](https://www.splunk.com/)**: Splunk offers a suite of tools for log management, monitoring, 
  and observability. It provides real-time insights into system performance, security, and operational 
  data, helping DevOps teams manage and troubleshoot issues across complex, distributed environments.

* **[Honeycomb](https://www.honeycomb.io/)**: Honeycomb is a tool focused on observability for complex, 
  distributed systems, particularly microservices. It offers “tracing” features that allow teams to 
  understand request flows and identify performance bottlenecks in real-time, supporting better debugging 
  and root cause analysis.

* **[AppDynamics](https://www.appdynamics.com/)**: Owned by Cisco, AppDynamics provides APM, 
  infrastructure visibility, and end-user monitoring. It is widely used for real-time application 
  monitoring, enabling teams to detect and address performance issues before they impact users.

{: .tip-title }
> [<i class="fa-regular fa-lightbulb"></i> Tips for getting started with DevOps](overview_tips)

